npe2 docs (#3769)
Napari/napari: docs/plugins/npe2_getting_started.md

> (npe2-getting-started)=

Reviewer: as mentioned in summary, i think by the time we merge this for developers to see this, "npe2-style" shouldn't be used so much.  It's just "plugin"  (with, perhaps, an alert at the top of the page saying "this refers to new style plugins ... for the deprecated api, see...")

Author: I toyed around with reorganizing the toc so the old napari-plugin-engine docs could get their own space, but I failed to figure it out.  For now, I'd like to keep the npe2 part of the title (it's needed for the toc).  Once we figure out the toc/reorg we can remove the npe2 parts.

# npe2 getting started guide

This guide will walk you through the steps to write an `npe2`-style napari
plugin from scratch.

At the end of this guide, you will have a working plugin that can be installed
with `pip` and autodetected by napari.

## Overview

Plugins are special python packages. They define certain functions that napari
calls when it needs to do something like read data. The plugin also needs some

> way of declaring what it does so that napari knows it can use it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Plugins are just python packages. They include contributions that napari
may use when performing tasks (like reading data), and a "manifest" file that
tells napari where in the package to find these contributions.
```

> This guide covers `npe2`-style plugins. `npe2` plugins declare the

Reviewer: suggest remove after above suggestion

functionality that they contribute in a file called the plugin manifest.

> Creating a new plugin from scratch involves the following steps:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Creating a new plugin involves the following steps:
```

1. Configure a python package to use an npe2 manifest (e.g. by editing
   `setup.cfg`):

>    - Create the _[entry point group][epg]_

Reviewer: since this is the overview, I would have this link to a place lower in the page that shows the syntax for adding the entry point.  (and _that_ section should link out to the specification)

Author: done

   - Make sure the manifest file is added to `package_data`.

> 2. Create the plugin manifest file.

Reviewer: also make an internal link

> This guide will walk you through the steps using a [cookiecutter][] template

Reviewer: i find this transition a little confusing.  perhaps a phrase like, "The cookiecutter will save you a lot of boilerplate, etc..." ... but as is, the above part lists the bare minimum (which I think is good!), and then it transitions to this, but without making clear that this is a convenience.

Specifically: I'd like to avoid the impression that you need to do *all* the stuff in the cookiecutter.  A plugin could literally be three files if it wanted to be (one python file, a setup.cfg, and a manifest)

Author: good point. I really like listing the minimal files. I think I'll put that in a little callout box.

project. cookiecutter is a command line utility that generates a project for
you after asking a few questions.

## 1. Create the project using cookiecutter

Install cookiecutter and use the template as follows:

```bash
pip install cookiecutter

> cookiecutter https://github.com/napari/cookiecutter-napari-npe2-plugin

Author: ```suggestion
cookiecutter https://github.com/napari/cookiecutter-napari-plugin --checkout npe2
```

```

> `cookiecutter` will start asking you questions. These will include questions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`cookiecutter` will ask you a series of questions
```

about the functionality you want your plugin to provide. In this guide we'll
focus on creating a reader that can read numpy ('\*.npy') files.

```

> ...

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```sh
# questions asked when running cookiecutter:
...
````

plugin_name: my_npy_reader
...
include_reader_plugin [y]: y

> reader_filename_patterns [*.tif, *.tiff]: *.npy

Reviewer: this makes me wonder, does this deal equally well with someone saying `[*.npy]`, `*.npy`, `.npy`, `['*.npy']`, etc?

Author: the answer is probably no, but I removed the prompt.  This example is going to get updated.

...
```

> Some of the cookiecutter prompts are elided above. We named our plugin

Reviewer: you could add line numbers above and refer to them if you want

Author: How do you add line numbers?  (besides manually typing them in)

I can't seem to find a way to make jupyterbook/myst do it.

`my_npy_reader`. This is the name that will be used for the python package. It

> should conform to the [PEP8][] naming convention.

Reviewer: ```
should conform to the [PEP8][] naming convention (short, all-lowercase names, using dashes instead of underscores)
```

Reviewer: note: `my_npy_reader` is _not_ a recommended package name. it should be `my-npy-reader`, and cookiecutter will turn the dashes into underscores for the top level module

> When the cookiecutter asked to include a reader plugin, we selected "y", and

Reviewer: (`When the cookiecutter asked to include a reader plugin,` could be removed with line numbers)

in the next question we told cookiecutter that our reader should be invoked

> for files matching the '\*.npy' glob pattern.

Reviewer: put `'y'` and `'*.npy'` in code formatting for clarity

Author: thanks! done.

After answering all the prompts, `cookiecutter` will create a directory called
`my_npy_reader` in the current directory that holds the generated files. It
will look something like this:

```
my-npy-reader
├── LICENSE
├── MANIFEST.in
├── README.md
├── docs
│   └── index.md
├── mkdocs.yml
├── requirements.txt
├── setup.cfg                  <-- Defines an entry point group
├── setup.py                       pointing to the plugin manifest
├── src
│   └── my_npy_reader
│       ├── __init__.py
│       ├── _reader.py         <-- example reader code
│       ├── _tests
│       │   ├── __init__.py
│       │   └── test_reader.py
│       └── napari.yml         <-- The plugin manifest
└── tox.ini
```

> Inside `setup.cfg` we added an entry point group that is used to identify

Reviewer: here's where you could/should link to the entry point specification

Author: moved link as you suggested

`npe2`-style plugins and to locate the plugin manifest file, `napari.yml`.

```cfg
[options.entry_points]
napari.manifest =
    my-npy-reader = my_npy_reader:napari.yaml
```

> The plugin manifest file is specified relative to the submodule root path. For

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The plugin manifest file is specified relative to the top level module path. For
```

the example it will be loaded from:
`<path/to/my-npy-reader>/my_npy_reader/src/my_npy_reader/napari.yaml`.

The generated `napari.yml` file looks like this:

```yaml
name: my-npy-reader

> author: Hero Protagonist

Reviewer 2: I'm not even reviewing, just reading, but :rofl: :clap:

  readers:
    - command: my_npy_reader.get_reader
      accepts_directories: false
      filename_patterns: ["*.npy"]
```

With `npe2` installed, we can check that this is a valid plugin manifest:

```bash
> npe2 validate src/my_npy_reader
✔ Manifest for 'napari FooBar' valid!
```

See the {ref}`npe2-manifest-spec` for more details.

## 2. Write code to implement your plugin

For our example `*.npy` reader, edit `src/my_npy_reader/_reader.py`:

```python
import numpy as np

def npy_file_reader(path):
    array = np.load(path)
    # return it as a list of LayerData tuples,
    # here with no optional metadata
    return [(array,)]

# This is the function referenced by the reader command in `napari.yml`.
def napari_get_reader(path):
    # remember, path can be a list, so we check its type first...
    # (this example plugin doesn't handle lists)
    if isinstance(path, str) and path.endswith(".npy"):
        # If we recognize the format, we return the actual reader function
        return npy_file_reader
    # otherwise we return None.
    return None
```

You can start testing your plugin using a local editable install, and opening
napari:

```bash
pip install -e .

> napari

Reviewer 2: Can we update this to be a single command that "executes" the plugin? e.g. `napari path/to/file.npy`? That's not a super interesting example, but I always have to look up the equivalent command for pre-loading a plugin widget.

Reviewer: Agreed it would be nice to bring that convenience from npe1 over.  We're still thinking about how to accomplish it

(npe2-getting-started)=

# npe2 getting started guide

> This guide will walk you through the steps to write an `npe2`-style napari

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This guide will walk you through the steps required to write an `npe2`-style napari
```

plugin from scratch.

At the end of this guide, you will have a working plugin that can be installed
with `pip` and autodetected by napari.

## Overview

> Plugins are just python packages. They include contributions that napari

Reviewer 3: I would reword to:

Plugins are just python packages with a specific napari 'manifest' file that lists 'contributions' for napari to use when performing tasks.

Author: reworded

> Plugins are just python packages. They include contributions that napari
> may use when performing tasks (like reading data), and a "manifest" file that
> tells napari where in the package to find these contributions.

Author: ```suggestion
Plugins are special python packages. They include a _plugin manifest_ file that lists _contributions_ that napari may use when performing tasks.
```

> This guide covers `npe2`-style plugins. `npe2` plugins declare the
> functionality that they contribute in a file called the plugin manifest.
> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

Creating a new plugin involves the following steps:

1. Configure a python package to use an npe2 manifest (e.g. by editing
   `setup.cfg`):
   - Create the _entry point group_.
   - Make sure the manifest file is added to `package_data`.
2. Create the plugin manifest file.

> This guide will walk you through the steps using a [cookiecutter][] template.

Reviewer 3: I'm sure you know this but, link here.

Author: ```suggestion
This guide will walk you through the steps using a [cookiecutter] template.
```

Author: It turns out the two link syntaxes are equivalent, but is seems the standard we use is `[cookiecutter]`.  So I switched to that.  The url is listed at the bottom of the markdown file.

cookiecutter is a command line utility that generates a python package for you
after asking a few questions. In this case, the package contains all the

> boilerplate needed for documenting, testing and deploying your plugin.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
boilerplate needed for building, documenting, testing and deploying your plugin.
```

```{note}
Minimally, a plugin could be just three files: `setup.cfg`, a python file, and
the plugin manifest file.
```

## 1. Create the project using cookiecutter

Install cookiecutter and use the template as follows:

```bash
pip install cookiecutter
cookiecutter https://github.com/napari/cookiecutter-napari-plugin --checkout npe2
```

`cookiecutter` will ask you a series of questions
about the functionality you want your plugin to provide. In this guide we'll
focus on creating a reader that can read numpy ('\*.npy') files.

```sh

> # questions asked when running cookiecutter:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
# example questions asked when running cookiecutter:
```

...
plugin_name: my-npy-reader
...
include_reader_plugin [y]: y
...
```

Some of the cookiecutter prompts are elided above. We named our plugin
`my_npy_reader`. This is the name that will be used for the python package. It

> should conform to the [PEP8][] naming convention (short, all-lowercase names,

Reviewer 3: Again, I know you know this but link

Author: ```suggestion
should conform to the [PEP8] naming convention (short, all-lowercase names,
```

using dashes instead of underscores).

When the cookiecutter asked to include a reader plugin, we selected `y`, and
in the next question we told cookiecutter that our reader should be invoked

> for files matching the `\*.npy` glob pattern.

Reviewer 3: maybe this is pedantic but a link here to glob https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Glob_(programming)

Author: ```suggestion
for files matching the `\*.npy` [glob](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Glob_(programming)) pattern.
```

After answering all the prompts, `cookiecutter` will create a directory called
`my_npy_reader` in the current directory that holds the generated files. It
will look something like this:

```

> my-npy-reader

Reviewer 3: always felt folder structure was missing from our docs so I love this 🙏

Reviewer 3: We're missing the .napari folder in here - may be worth including with a comment "napari hub specific customization"

Author: need advice. could you tell me what to add?

Author: added what we discussed.  thanks

├── LICENSE
├── MANIFEST.in
├── README.md
├── docs
│   └── index.md
├── mkdocs.yml
├── requirements.txt
├── setup.cfg                  <-- Defines an entry point group
├── setup.py                       pointing to the plugin manifest
├── src
│   └── my_npy_reader
│       ├── __init__.py
│       ├── _reader.py         <-- example reader code
│       ├── _tests
│       │   ├── __init__.py
│       │   └── test_reader.py
│       └── napari.yml         <-- The plugin manifest
└── tox.ini
```

Inside `setup.cfg` we added an [entry point group][epg] that is used to identify
`npe2`-style plugins and to locate the plugin manifest file, `napari.yml`.

```cfg
[options.entry_points]
napari.manifest =
    my-npy-reader = my_npy_reader:napari.yaml
```

> The plugin manifest file is specified relative to the top level module path. For

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The plugin manifest file is specified relative to the top level module path as specified in `setup.cfg` `options.packages.find`. For
```

`<path/to/my-npy-reader>/my_npy_reader/src/my_npy_reader/napari.yaml`.

The generated `napari.yml` file looks like this:

```yaml
name: my-npy-reader
display_name: My Plugin

> entry_point: my_npy_reader
> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

  commands:
    - id: my-npy-reader.get_reader
      python_name: my_plugin._reader:napari_get_reader
      title: Open data with napari FooBar
  readers:
    - command: my-npy-reader.get_reader
      accepts_directories: false
      filename_patterns: ["*.npy"]
```

With `npe2` installed, we can check that this is a valid plugin manifest:

```bash
> npe2 validate src/my_npy_reader

> ✔ Manifest for 'napari FooBar' valid!

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
✔ Manifest for 'My Plugin' valid!
```

```

See the {ref}`npe2-manifest-spec` for more details.

## 2. Write code to implement your plugin

For our example `*.npy` reader, edit `src/my_npy_reader/_reader.py`:

```python
import numpy as np

def npy_file_reader(path):
    array = np.load(path)
    # return it as a list of LayerData tuples,
    # here with no optional metadata
    return [(array,)]

# This is the function referenced by the reader command in `napari.yml`.
def napari_get_reader(path):
    # remember, path can be a list, so we check its type first...
    # (this example plugin doesn't handle lists)
    if isinstance(path, str) and path.endswith(".npy"):
        # If we recognize the format, we return the actual reader function
        return npy_file_reader
    # otherwise we return None.
    return None
```

You can start testing your plugin using a local editable install, and opening
napari:

```bash
pip install -e .
napari
```

> ## 3. Make your plugin discoverable

Reviewer 3: I feel like we actually covered this above? If there's anything here that you don't think is covered, I think we should move it to the section above. And maybe for this bit we copy over the 'Framework:napari' classifier instructions from step 4 below?

Author: moved package metadata stuff out of section 2 so it's not repeated here.

Packages and modules installed in the same environment as napari may make
themselves discoverable to napari using package metadata.

The manifest file should be specified in the plugin's `setup.cfg` or
`setup.py` file using the _[entry point group][epg]_: `napari.manifest`. For
example, this would be the section for a plugin `npe2-tester` with
`napari.yaml` as the manifest file:

```cfg
[options.entry_points]
napari.manifest =
    npe2-tester = npe2_tester:napari.yaml
```

The manifest file is specified relative to the submodule root path.
So for the example it will be loaded from: `<path/to/npe2-tester>/napari.yaml`.

The manifest file also needs to be included as _[package data][pd]_ in
distributable forms for the package. For example:

```toml
[metadata]
...
include_package_data=True

[options.package_data]
npe2_tester =
    napari.yaml
```

A user can install napari and your plugin with:

```bash
pip install napari myplugin
```

## 4. Preparing for release

Use the `Framework :: napari` [classifier](https://pypi.org/classifiers/) in
your package's core metadata to make your plugin more discoverable. If you used
the cookiecutter, this has already been done for you.

> Once your package, with its `Framework :: napari` classifier, is listed on

Reviewer 3: We need quick instructions here for how to get the package onto pypi e.g. running

```
python setup.py bdist_wheel
twine upload dist/*
```

or using the workflow (can just link to cookiecutter docs here: https://github.com/napari/cookiecutter-napari-plugin/tree/npe2#set-up-automatic-deployments)

Author: added a link to the python packaging guide

[guide][hubguide].

The napari hub reads the metadata of your package and displays it in a number
of places so that users can easily find your plugin and decide if it provides
functionality they need. Most of this metadata lives inside your package
configuration files.

You can also include a napari hub specific description file at
/.napari/DESCRIPTION.md. The hub preferentially displays this file over your
repository’s README.md when it’s available. This file allows you to maintain a
more developer/repository oriented README.md while still making sure potential
users get all the information they need to get started with your plugin.

Finally, once you have curated your package metadata and description, you can
preview your metadata, and check any missing fields using the `napari-hub-cli`
tool. Install this tool using

```bash
pip install napari-hub-cli
```

and preview your metadata with

```bash
napari-hub-cli preview-metadata ./my-npy-reader
```

For more information on the tool see the repository README](https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/napari-hub-cli).

If you want your plugin to be available on PyPI, but not visible on the napari hub,

> submit an issue on the [napari hub repository]

Reviewer 3: These instructions should say:

If you want your plugin to be available on PyPI, but not visible on the napari hub, you can add a `.napari/config.yml` file to the root of your repository with a visibility key e.g.

```
visibility: hidden # can go to listing directly via its url but doesn't show in search results

#OR

visibility: disabled # not on napari hub at all
```

For more information on this, see the [customization guide](https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/napari-hub/blob/main/docs/customizing-plugin-listing.md#visibility)

Author: added text

> If you want your plugin to be available on PyPI, but not visible on the napari hub,
> submit an issue on the [napari hub repository]
> (https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/napari-hub/issues/new) or send an email to
> `team@napari-hub.org` and it will be removed.

Author: ```suggestion
If you want your plugin to be available on PyPI, but not visible on the napari hub, you can add a `.napari/config.yml` file to the root of your repository with a visibility key. For details, see the [customization guide](https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/napari-hub/blob/main/docs/customizing-plugin-listing.md#visibility).
```

## 5. Share your plugin with the world

Once you are ready to share your plugin, [upload the Python package to
PyPI][pypi-upload] and it can then be installed with a simple `pip install mypackage`. If you used the {ref}`plugin-cookiecutter-template`, you can also
[setup automated deployments][autodeploy].

> If you are using Github, add the ["napari-plugin"

Reviewer 3: I wonder if we should just remove this? This is definitely leftover from "pre-napari-framework" times I think. @sofroniewn ?

Author: I'm for leaving this as for now, and revising the hub related docs as a separate issue. Especially since it my depend on release of other features on the hub side.
